---
layout: post
comments: true
categories: blog
title: Deep Learning Based Image Classification
excerpt: How deep neural networks can be taught to classify images using deep learning
author: Yash Bhalgat
category: [Informative]
tags: [Neural Networks, Deep Learning]

assets-dir: assets/blog/deep-learning-based-image-classification
header-img: assets/blog/deep-learning-based-image-classification/cover.jpg
---

#### Pre-requisites

Idea about Artificial Neural Networks, good if you
have familiarity with the ideas of supervised learning, logistic
regression, gradient descent, SVM-based classification, k-means
clustering, kernel tricks like KPCA, etc.

#### Motivation

Deep neural networks (DNNs) trained via backpropagation
were recently shown to perform well on image classification tasks with
lakhs of training images and lot of categories. The feature
representation learned by these networks achieves state-of-the-art
performance not only on the classification task for which the network
was trained, but also on various other visual recognition tasks, for
example: classification on various dataset; scene recognition, etc. This
capability to generalize to new datasets makes supervised CNN
(Convolutional Neural Networks) training an attractive approach for
generic visual feature learning.


### What is Deep Learning / What makes it “deep”[<sup>1</sup>](http://www.nvidia.com/content/events/geoInt2015/LBrown_DL_Image_ClassificationGEOINT.pdf)?

![image]({{ site.url }}/{{ page.assets-dir }}/image02.png)

-   1 million parameters

-   10 mil images

-   10 layers!!

That’s what makes it “deep”!

Deep learning methods aim at learning feature hierarchies with features
from higher levels of the hierarchy formed by the composition of lower
level features. For image classification tasks, the most effective deep
networks used nowadays are the Convolutional Neural Networks (others
include corrNets, restricted Boltzmann machines, Recurrent Neural
Networks, etc.).

### Image Classification with CNNs

Each CNN has its own architecture - convolution layers, pooling layers
(max pooling, weighted mean pooling, etc), fully connected layers et al.

Three methods of training using a Conv Net:

1.  Supervised

2.  Unsupervised

3.  Reinforcement

![image]({{ site.url }}/{{ page.assets-dir }}/image05.png)

The most common method is to learn the network using a huge set of
training images. This approach is called the supervised learning of the
network. To learn the network implied learning the filters in the
convolution layer (filters are also called weights)

It involves 2 phases - *Training* run and a accuracy *testing* run

1\) **Training run:** Pick a CNN architecture -> Input a million
training images spanning all categories -> One or days of GPU
computation

2\) **Accuracy testing:** If the accuracy is bad, fix the training set,
tweak the training parameters -> do it again

CNN learnt with supervised learning give a high accuracy for
classification tasks and the same network can be used for other tasks
too, like scene detection.

### Introduction of discriminative Unsupervised learning in Neural Networks

The downside of supervised training is the need for expensive labeling,
as the amount of required labeled samples grows quickly the larger the
model gets. For this reason, unsupervised learning remains an appealing
paradigm, since it can make use of raw unlabeled images and videos.
Furthermore, on vision tasks outside classification it is not even
certain whether training based on object class labels is advantageous.
For example, recent results show that it outperforms supervised feature
learning also on descriptor matching.

In Unsupervised learning, the filter (or weights) are not learnt
directly from the training images. Sometimes, a predefined set of
filters is chosen - best example being the Gabor filters - or the
filters are extracted from the images ‘patches’ with some processing
done on them.

![image]({{ site.url }}/{{ page.assets-dir }}/image04.png)

**fig: MNIST dataset classification using k-means clustering**

A common framework used in unsupervised feature learning is [<sup>2</sup>](http://ai.stanford.edu/~ang/papers/aistats11-AnalysisSingleLayerUnsupervisedFeatureLearning.pdf) :

1.  Extract random patches from unlabeled training images.

2.  Apply a pre-processing stage to the patches.

3.  Learn a feature-mapping using an unsupervised learning algorithm.

Given the learned feature mapping and a set of labeled training images
we can then perform feature extraction and classification:

1.  Extract features from equally spaced sub-patches covering the
    input image.

2.  Pool features together over regions of the input image to reduce the
    number of feature values.

3.  Train a classifier to predict the labels given the feature vectors.

### Conclusion

Image classification results can be hugely increased using some
preprocessing (can be anything depending on the application). It is
common practice to perform several simple normalization steps before
attempting to generate features from data. In Unsupervised feature
extraction, there are also some tricks like the *‘kernel trick’* which
can improve the classification results.

The feature vector length can always be reduced using some fully
connected layers in the network. This can help speed-up the
classification, but must be used carefully as to not compromise the
accuracy. Much future work is going on in the direction of using
unsupervised or semi-supervised neural networks, since as of now they
are not very scalable.

Deep learning, CNNs, corrNets, etc are THE most active fields in data
analytics. And I believe can be learnt only through experimentation! So
feel free to explore this ocean of deep learning! Enjoy!

Regards,

Yash Bhalgat.

\[1\]: [deep learning for image classification - Nvidia. 2015. 15 May.](http://www.nvidia.com/content/events/geoInt2015/LBrown_DL_Image_ClassificationGEOINT.pdf)

\[2\]: [Coates, A. "An Analysis of Single-Layer Networks in Unsupervised Feature Learning." 2011.](http://ai.stanford.edu/~ang/papers/aistats11-AnalysisSingleLayerUnsupervisedFeatureLearning.pdf)
